for more on the humanitarian situation
in Gaza we're now joined by James Elder
who spokesman for Unicef the United
Nations Children's Fund he is live from
darala in central Gaza Mr Elder thank
you very much for being with us you were
last in Gaza six weeks ago I understand
how would you compare the situation now
and then in terms of the humanitarian
crisis how much more desperate is it for
the people of
Gaza oh F it's dire it should surprise
no one that it is this much worse
because again in the last 6 weeks every
single day we've had the bombardments
the drones the Relentless attacks the
denials of Aid so it shouldn't surprise
anyone but it should it should break our
hearts and and a and a Spight on our
Humanity that it's been allowed to get
to this point we are now at a point
where where yeah we're I'm outside a
hospital again this is a wartime
hospital as soon as I walked in fly as
soon as I walked in I found a little boy
Ali who 5 days ago was asleep in the
family home uh when it was struck and
the next thing he fell three floors and
landed in rubble I met his mother two
stories above she explained that two
other siblings have been killed this has
gone on for the last 6 weeks F this has
gone on for 250 days now of course it's
sweltering heat people say to me oh
people must be used to that yes they are
used to the Garin are used to the heat
in their family home in their home with
air conditioning in their home with
ceiling fans Not in tense cram together
in a breathless space um with 40° heat
on Sand this is what people are they're
being denied Aid they're being denied
protection they're being denied dignity
and whilst the last 3 days fly have been
Sleepless because of the bombs and the
drones it's
250 days for the civilians here so yes
everyone here physically psychologically
is somehow just holding on I I'll ask
you a bit more about the impact of the
war on children in just a moment but I
just wanted to get uh to Aid as you
mentioned Aid there how much of it has
gone into Gaza in the last few days I
understand you were part of a convoy of
a trucks that were trying to get into
the Gaza ship can you describe to us the
process of that what it takes to get
those a tracks into Gaza and how many
have gone in in uh these past few
days yeah it's a it's a very complicated
process to get in because of the the
restrictions uh uh put put on top of aid
but we do it we know the paperwork we
know uh the Hoops to jump through but it
is very difficult to get Aid in for
example in May humanitarian agents got
in half as many trucks of Aid FY as in
April half as many when we have this
critical nutrition situation why was
that the case that was the case because
in May of course we had the Rafer
offensive The Limited quote unquote
limited offensive in Rafa that meant
that led to the displacement of a
million people so less Aid is coming in
but it's not just getting it in it's
when we get it in it's making sure we
can get it across the Gaza Strip without
Aid workers being killed more Aid
workers have been killed in this war
than any War any War since the Advent of
the United Nations it's extraordinary it
is an incredibly difficult place to work
but Palestinians and foreigners are very
brave on the front lines once you get it
in if we look Val yes to Wednesday a few
days ago it was a mission of Unicef we
were taking a truck full of nutritional
and medical supplies for 10,000 children
nutrition and medical supplies for
10,000 children we had all the approvals
we were going to Gaza City from da B and
from here uh it's basically a 40 km
round trip it took 13 hours and we spent
eight of those around checkpoints
arguing around paperwork was it a truck
was it a van all sorts of he said she
said the reality is this truck was then
denied access so those 10,000 children
did not get that Aid now UNICEF will go
back again but it's not as easy as just
returning the next day because of how
dangerous this is a place to operate
remembering Israel as the occupying
power has the legal responsibility to
facilitate that Aid we must have armored
vehicles with convoys right UNICEF also
does doeses sanitation we do water we do
protection we need to be everywhere so
that was denied but fly there is an even
more bitter dark aspect to that mission
as we stood on the coastal line there
for hours and hours and hours I was
watching fishermen I was watching Men
just they were probably lawyers and
engineers in a past life with a single
fishing net each just trying to catch a
few fish for their families suddenly
tanks came from the from the very large
Israeli checkpoint a tank sorry a tank
came next thing two every all the
fishermen fled as two fishermen fled
they were shot they were shot on the
beach I was with other un agencies
doctors and paramedics they immediately
rang authorities to get us permission to
access these people in case there was a
sign of life to immediately get them
medical care that was denied that help
was denied finally finally half an hour
later as those men lay there those men
who were no doubt someone's brother
father son as they lay there the other
fishermen their family their friends
took body bags that we had and went down
the beach and dra brought them up I saw
them one man had been shot in the back
another man who still had a fishing net
around his foot was shot in the neck I
know that because I saw that only
because we bore witness to that these
are not unique events on the Gaza Strip
how incredibly sad James you talked
about the children and meeting children
who were injured uh in uh recent Israeli
attacks in Dera where you are right now
there is the impact of the war of course
of children being killed they're being
maned but there's also malnutrition
which is spreading among children fast
and and reaching devastating and and
unprecedented levels across Gaza because
as you mentioned of a lack of
humanitarian Aid and the restrictions on
Aid going into Gaza what impact is this
having on the children now and what
impact is it going to have on them in in
the
[Music]
future oh the the impact on children
whether it's night after night of
bombardments or the idea that a teenage
girl or a grandmother CU all day all day
maybe to get a shower the idea that
disease is taking root and yes we had
stabiliz stabiliz stabilization centers
F they are critical places for those
children with some of the mo most lethal
forms of malnutrition they closed during
the raffer offensive so that's thousands
of children who were getting the the the
treatment they needed they're not
getting the treatment they needed all of
this all of this the bombardments last
night I was in Rafa last night it was
very intense from bombardments to Apache
helicopters 24/7 no there's no way
anyone slept I don't sleep I'm in a
building how do you sleep in a tent amid
that it all f it all comes back to a
ceasefire and the more and more we see
the more it seems that those people who
have the decision-making power on a
ceasefire seem so utterly disconnected
to the suffering of everyday children
here on the Gaza Strip James Elder thank
you so much for talking to us thank you
for joining us from Gaza James Elder is
a spokesman for Unicef live there from
darlala in central Gaza